CEXT-6095: [SPEC] Support Admin UI mass actions (Order & Product & Customer) (#484)
adobe/aio-commerce-sdk: specs/features/CEXT-6095-admin-ui-sdk-mass-actions-v2.md

# Admin UI SDK mass actions v2

- **Ticket:** [CEXT-6095](https://jira.corp.adobe.com/browse/CEXT-6095)
- **Created:** 2026-05-29
- [ ] **Implemented**

## Summary

Move the Admin UI SDK code generation from extension point `commerce/backend-ui/1` to the new
`commerce/backend-ui/2`, and replace the mass-action input schema in `app.commerce.config.*` with
a cleaner shape that uses an explicit `type` discriminator, an inlined `notifications` block, and
a `runtimeAction` reference to a `workerProcess` operation. The mass-action payload flows through
the existing `app-management/app-config.js` (which already serves the app config); no dedicated
`registration` action is generated. The Admin UI SDK extension at `commerce/backend-ui/2` reads
the `adminUi` block from `app-config.js` directly.

> **This SDK removes `commerce/backend-ui/1` generation entirely.** From this release on, the

Reviewer: There's dedicated ticket to remove support of v1. V2 impl should be added while keeping V1 in place.

- Replace the mass-action input schema with the v2 shape:
  - `id` (renamed from `actionId`); developers write the bare name and the SDK
    auto-prefixes with `${metadata.id}::` to produce the final `actionId` in the generated
    JSON.
  - `type: "view" | "worker"` discriminator (replaces the `displayIframe` boolean). Naming
    mirrors App Builder's `view` and `workerProcess` operation type names.
  - `runtimeAction: "<impl>"` for `type: "worker"`, referencing a `workerProcess`
    operation declared in `app.config.yaml`. The value matches the operation's `impl`
    verbatim (e.g. `runtimeAction: "customers/export-customers"` matches
    `impl: customers/export-customers`) — unique by App Builder construction, so no
    disambiguation is needed. Naming aligns with the `runtimeAction` field already used in
    webhooks and events (see #480).
  - Inlined `notifications: { success?, error? }`, replacing the standalone
    `bannerNotification.massActions.<grid>[]` cross-reference.
  - Field applicability enforced by the schema (e.g. `sandbox` only valid for `type: "view"`,
    `timeout` only valid for `type: "worker"`).

> - Update fixtures and tests to use the v2 input shape.

Reviewer: Add fixtures/tests v2, keep v1

- Cross-file validation at `pre-app-build` time that `runtimeAction` matches the `impl` of a
  `workerProcess` operation declared in `app.config.yaml`. A typo should fail the build, not
  produce a runtime 404 from Adobe Commerce.

**Non-goals**

- Migrating the other v1 chapters (menu items, grid columns, view buttons, custom fees, banner
  notifications for view buttons) to v2. They are still authored in their v1 shape; only mass
  actions move.
- Removing the standalone `bannerNotification.orderViewButtons` block — that belongs to a
  different chapter and is preserved unchanged.
- Removing `commerce/backend-ui/1` support from Adobe Commerce admin. That is a separate
  decision owned by the Admin UI SDK team; this spec only covers SDK-side generation.

> ## Developer experience

Reviewer: I am missing the expected request/response to implement in the runtime action when `type=view`.
This is called wire contract in other specs, like
https://github.com/adobe/aio-commerce-sdk/blob/d7b6a7b1b9828749fc00d96355f5fe85513efba0/specs/features/CEXT-6096-admin-ui-grid-column-extensions.md?plain=1#L140-L182

          customerSelectLimit: 100,
        },
        // Backend (iframe-less)
        {
          actionId: "my-app::export-customers",
          label: "Export selected customers",
          path: "customers/export-customers", // relative path "hack"
          displayIframe: false,
          timeout: 30,
          customerSelectLimit: 1000,
        },
      ],
    },
    bannerNotification: {
      massActions: {
        customer: [
          {
            actionId: "my-app::export-customers",
            successMessage: "Customers exported successfully",
            errorMessage: "Could not export customers",
          },
        ],
      },
    },
  },
}
```

With this feature, the same two actions are authored with an explicit `type`, inlined
notifications, and a `runtimeAction` reference instead of a hand-rolled path for the worker case:

```ts
// v2 — new shape
adminUi: {
  customer: {
    massActions: [
      {
        id: "tag-customers", // SDK prepends `${metadata.id}::` automatically
        label: "Tag selected customers",
        type: "view",
        path: "#/tag-customers",
        sandbox: "allow-modals",
        selectionLimit: 100,

>         installation: {

Reviewer: according to latest feedback from @danipt @asalloum5 we don't need to use `installation` nesting, just put this props in the root.

unchanged, so existing Commerce admin behavior is preserved.

**This SDK removes `commerce/backend-ui/1` generation entirely.** From this release on, the
SDK only emits `commerce-backend-ui-2/`. Apps already deployed with a `commerce-backend-ui-1/`
folder continue to function in Adobe Commerce admin because the generated files are static and
do not depend on this SDK at runtime — but any subsequent `aio app build` or
`pre-app-build` run on those projects with a newer SDK version will produce
`commerce-backend-ui-2/` instead.

## Motivation

The mass-action shape that app developers write today mixes UI flows and backend flows behind a
single boolean (`displayIframe`). The same `path` field means two different things depending on
that boolean, runtime-action invocations are wired through a relative-path "hack", and the
success/error messages for an action live in a separate top-level block
(`bannerNotification.massActions`) cross-referenced by `actionId`. The result is a config that
is hard to read, hard to author correctly, and easy to break by renaming an `actionId` in one
place but not the other.

> See the ([spike](https://wiki.corp.adobe.com/spaces/DMSArchitecture/pages/3872493513/Spike+Admin+UI+SDK+Specs))

Reviewer: I'd remove internal links from this spec

**Goals**

- Generate code for `commerce/backend-ui/2` instead of `commerce/backend-ui/1`. This SDK no
  longer produces `commerce-backend-ui-1/`; existing folders in deployed apps keep working as
  static files.
- Replace the mass-action input schema with the v2 shape:
  - `id` (renamed from `actionId`).

>   - `type: "ui" | "worker"` discriminator (replaces the `displayIframe` boolean).

Reviewer: I'd try to be more consistent in the `type` field to be in sync of what is written in `commerce/backend-ui/2`
or `web`/`action`
or `view`/`worker`

>   - `backend: "<operation-name>"` for `type: "worker"`, referencing a `workerProcess` operation

Reviewer 2: Not a strong opinion between backend or runtimeAction, but we should try to be as much consisten as possible in the UI component definition: https://github.com/adobe/aio-commerce-sdk/pull/480/changes

Reviewer: I used `runtimeAction` in #480 because it is consisten with webhooks and events. I'd go for that.

Author: Maybe it worth to discuss with @asalloum5 I was following the spike in https://wiki.corp.adobe.com/spaces/DMSArchitecture/pages/3872513118/Spike+Admin+UI+SDK+Specs+-+Mass+actions

    declared in `app.config.yaml`.
  - Inlined `notifications: { success?, error? }`, replacing the standalone
    `bannerNotification.massActions.<grid>[]` cross-reference.
  - Field applicability enforced by the schema (e.g. `sandbox` only valid for `type: "ui"`,
    `timeout` only valid for `type: "worker"`).
- Keep the generated `registration` JSON wire-format identical to what Adobe Commerce reads
  today, so Commerce admin behavior is preserved.
- Update fixtures and tests to use the v2 input shape; assertions on the generated wire-format
  remain unchanged.

**Non-goals**

- Migrating the other v1 chapters (menu items, grid columns, view buttons, custom fees, banner
  notifications for view buttons) to v2. They are still authored in their v1 shape; only mass
  actions move.
- Removing the standalone `bannerNotification.orderViewButtons` block — that belongs to a
  different chapter and is preserved unchanged.

> - Cross-file validation that `backend: "<name>"` actually matches a `workerProcess` operation

Reviewer 2: Why do we not want to do that? The sooner we highlight errors, let's frustration we will have with the App Developer

Author: You're right ¡¡¡ Moved to Goals. Anyway, I have to check the Unresolved question with @asalloum5

  declared in `app.config.yaml`. The schema validates that `backend` is a non-empty string;
  validating the reference is a follow-up.
- Removing `commerce/backend-ui/1` support from Adobe Commerce admin. That is a separate
  decision owned by the Admin UI SDK team; this spec only covers SDK-side generation.

## Developer experience

### Authoring a mass action

Before this feature, both UI and backend mass actions share one shape, with `displayIframe`
flipping the behavior:

```ts
// v1 — current shape
adminUiSdk: {
  registration: {
    customer: {
      massActions: [
        // UI iframe
        {

>           actionId: "my-app::tag-customers",

Reviewer 2: Should we add a title and description here to use it during the installation experience?

Author: You mean add it in app.commerce.config.ts, then generate it in the action src/commerce-backend-ui-1/.generated/actions/registration/index.js to be read by App Management UI during the installation process? 

Not sure if I'm following you @danipt ...

          label: "Tag selected customers",
          path: "#/tag-customers",
          displayIframe: true,
          sandbox: "allow-modals",
          customerSelectLimit: 100,
        },
        // Backend (iframe-less)
        {
          actionId: "my-app::export-customers",
          label: "Export selected customers",
          path: "customers/export-customers", // relative path "hack"
          displayIframe: false,
          timeout: 30,
          customerSelectLimit: 1000,
        },
      ],
    },
    bannerNotification: {
      massActions: {
        customer: [
          {
            actionId: "my-app::export-customers",
            successMessage: "Customers exported successfully",
            errorMessage: "Could not export customers",
          },
        ],
      },
    },
  },
}
```

With this feature, the same two actions are authored with an explicit `type`, inlined
notifications, and a `backend` reference instead of a hand-rolled path for the worker case:

```ts
// v2 — new shape

> adminUiSdk: {

Reviewer: @danipt proposed `adminUi` in #480

>   registration: {

Reviewer: drop this nesting

Author: adminUiSdk.registration? 
go with adminUiSdk{ customer: ...., ... }. ?

    customer: {
      massActions: [
        {

>           id: "my-app::tag-customers",

Reviewer: probably would be worth that prefix (my-app::) is added by the sdk automatically

Author: Ok, we can obtain it from metadata.id

>           label: "Tag selected customers",

Reviewer: this is the label to show in the admin ui or for installation?
we need probably installation label/description as we do for webhooks/events

# Admin UI SDK mass actions v2

- **Ticket:** [CEXT-6095](https://jira.corp.adobe.com/browse/CEXT-6095)
- **Created:** 2026-05-29
- [ ] **Implemented**

## Summary

Move the Admin UI SDK code generation from extension point `commerce/backend-ui/1` to the new
`commerce/backend-ui/2`, and replace the mass-action input schema in `app.commerce.config.*` with
a cleaner shape that uses an explicit `type` discriminator, an inlined `notifications` block, and
a `runtimeAction` reference to a `workerProcess` operation. The wire-format JSON written to
`.generated/actions/registration/index.js` — the payload Adobe Commerce actually reads — remains

> unchanged, so existing Commerce admin behavior is preserved.

Reviewer 3: Not sure about the last sentence, I think changes in Adobe Commerce will be required to read the v2 version, or we want to create a mapping from v2 to v1 so we don't update Admin UI SDK code?

Author: As talked, no need to keep the same output format

          label: "Tag selected customers",
          path: "#/tag-customers",
          displayIframe: true,
          sandbox: "allow-modals",
          customerSelectLimit: 100,
        },
        // Backend (iframe-less)
        {
          actionId: "my-app::export-customers",
          label: "Export selected customers",
          path: "customers/export-customers", // relative path "hack"
          displayIframe: false,
          timeout: 30,
          customerSelectLimit: 1000,
        },
      ],
    },
    bannerNotification: {
      massActions: {
        customer: [
          {
            actionId: "my-app::export-customers",
            successMessage: "Customers exported successfully",
            errorMessage: "Could not export customers",
          },
        ],
      },
    },
  },
}
```

With this feature, the same two actions are authored with an explicit `type`, inlined
notifications, and a `runtimeAction` reference instead of a hand-rolled path for the worker case:

```ts
// v2 — new shape
adminUi: {
  customer: {
    massActions: [
      {
        id: "tag-customers", // SDK prepends `${metadata.id}::` automatically
        label: "Tag selected customers",

>         type: "view",
>         path: "#/tag-customers",
>         sandbox: "allow-modals",
>         selectionLimit: 100,
>         installation: {
>           label: "Tag customers",
>           description: "Adds a bulk action to tag selected customers from the grid.",
>         },
>         notifications: {
>           success: "Customers tagged successfully",
>           error: "Could not tag the selected customers",
>         },
>       },

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      {
        id: "tag-customers", // SDK prepends `${metadata.id}::` automatically
        label: "Tag selected customers",
        description: "Adds a bulk action to tag selected customers from the grid.",
        type: "view",
        path: "#/tag-customers",
        sandbox: "allow-modals",
        selectionLimit: 100,
        notifications: {
          success: "Customers tagged successfully",
          error: "Could not tag the selected customers",
        },
      },
```

Reviewer 3: @danipt why do we need the installation node for the UI? To be aligned with events and webhooks either use directly here label and description or add the installation node to all schema components.

Reviewer 2: Let's be consistent and use the same pattern like in events and webhooks

        },
      },
    ],
  },
}
```

> **Renames from v1:** the top-level block is `adminUi` (renamed from `adminUiSdk`, aligning
> with #480), and the `registration` wrapper present in v1 is dropped — entities live directly
> under `adminUi`.

Operations referenced from `runtimeAction` must be declared on `commerce/backend-ui/2` in
`app.config.yaml`:

```yaml
extensions:
  commerce/backend-ui/2:
    operations:
      view:
        - type: web
          impl: index.html
      workerProcess:
        - type: action
          impl: customers/export-customers
```

### Field applicability

The schema enforces which fields apply to which `type`:

| Field            | `type: "view"` | `type: "worker"` |
| ---------------- | -------------- | ---------------- |
| `id`             | required       | required         |
| `label`          | required       | required         |
| `title`          | optional       | optional         |
| `confirm`        | optional       | optional         |
| `notifications`  | optional       | optional         |
| `installation`   | optional       | optional         |
| `selectionLimit` | optional       | optional         |

> | `path`           | **required**   | rejected         |

Reviewer 3: why is it `**required**` instead of `required`? Is there a difference?

Author: Removed

Misuse produces a clear validation error at build time, e.g.:

```
Field "runtimeAction" is not allowed when type is "view"
Field "path" is required when type is "view"
```

### `selectionLimit` rename

The order, product, and customer grids each used a differently named limit field today
(`selectionLimit`, `productSelectLimit`, `customerSelectLimit`). In v2 they unify to
`selectionLimit` across all three grids. The wire-format key written to the generated JSON
remains grid-specific (`orderSelectLimit` / `productSelectLimit` / `customerSelectLimit`) so
Commerce admin behavior is unchanged.

### What does not change

- The contents of the runtime action at
  `src/commerce-backend-ui-2/.generated/actions/registration/index.js` follow the same
  template as today — only the directory name and the registration JSON literal differ. The
  response shape served to Commerce admin is byte-equivalent to v1 for an equivalent input.
- The other Admin UI SDK extension blocks (menu items, grid columns, view buttons, custom
  fees, banner notifications for view buttons) continue to use their v1 shape. Only mass
  actions move to v2 in this ticket.

## Design

> ### Wire-format invariant

Reviewer 3: This is not needed since Commerce will know how to read the new v2 format.
